# Working with virtual environments on your local machine

While working with Django, you must first go to the local directory where you want to create your project and setup a virtual environment. 

Ensure pip in installed on your device. The latest version can be installed and upgraded by using the command:

### windows

```python
py -m pip install --upgrade pip
```

### MacOS

```python
python3 -m pip install --user --upgrade pip
```

Python uses `venv` as the preferred module to create and manage virtual environments. `venv` is also included in the Python standard library and does not require any additional installation. 

`venv` (for Python 3) and `virtualenv` (for Python 2) allow you to manage separate package installations for different projects. 

In case you want to install `virtualenv` that is used for earlier versions of Python, use the command:

### windows

```python
py -m pip install --user virtualenv
```

### MacOS

```python
python3 -m pip install --user virtualenv
```

You can create a virtual environment in the specific project directory by running a command:

### windows

```python
py -m venv env
```

### MacOS

```python
python3 -m venv env
```

#### Note:
`env` is the name assigned to the virtual environment and this will create a virtual Python installation in the `env` folder.

## Activate the virtual environment

Next you need to activate the virtual environment. You will put the virtual environment-specific python and pip executables into your shell’s PATH.

You can do this by running a command such as:

### windows

```python
.\env\Scripts\activate
```

### MacOS

```python
source env/bin/activate
```

## Exit the virtual environment
You can exit the virtual environment by running the command:

####  MacOS and Windows 
```python
deactivate 
```
There may be OS specific difficulties you may encounter while installing and using virtual environments. 

More information can be found on the official Python website

#### Note: 
`venv` is not the only option available for creating virtual environments and other options exist such as `pipenv` which is another variation. 

However, in this course, the use of `venv` is recommended. 